---
layout: page
title: Coherence
chapter: 11
nav_exclude: true
---

If you've been reading Section III in order, you may be surprised we've not
covered algorithmic-level modeling. After all, programming involves designing
algorithms. However, the algorithms required for implementing formal theories
are not necessarily also algorithmic-level theories. It is important to keep
levels of explanation distinct and consistent (see [Chapter 2 -
Foundations](/lovelace/part_i/foundations) and Blokpoel, 2018), and so we've
focused on implementing computer simulations at the computational level.{%
sidenote 'id-sn-realist' 'In other words, Formal and Verbal have no commitment
to the cognitive plausibility of the algorithms underlying the simulation code.'
%}  Of course, algorithmic-level theories do form an integral part of tri-level
framework (see [Chapter 2 - Foundations](/lovelace/part_i/foundations)). In this
chapter, we take a closer look at various relationships between computational-
and algorithmic-level modeling. What motivates a modeler to consider
algorithmic-level explanations? How do algorithmic-level models relate to
computational-level models? And since this is a simulation chapter: How can we
use computer simulations to scrutinize algorithmic-level theories for their
(in)consistency with computational-level theory? We will use Coherence theory as
a case study to address these questions.

Let's recap. At the computational level, we ask the question, ‘what is the
nature of the problem solved by the capacity?’ An answer to this question comes
in the form of a hypothesized input-output mapping, a.k.a. computational
problem. At the algorithmic level, we ask: ‘how is the input-output mapping that
characterizes the capacity computed?’ An answer to this question comes in the
form of a hypothesized algorithm, a step-by-step procedure computing the
hypothesized mapping.

{% question %}
In your own words, what is the goal of computational level modeling? And what is
the goal of algorithmic level modeling? Is one better than the other? Why (not)?
{% endquestion %}

Apart from the motivation to explain how the system is computing a particular
function, there are other reasons for cognitive scientists to move towards the
algorithmic level. We discuss two.

{% marginfigure 'id-mf-difficult' 'assets/img/thinking-difficult.jpg' 'Computational-level thinking is often
experienced as more difficult than algorithmic-level thinking' %} The first
reason is that designing computational level theories is hard, especially if you
do not have the appropriate training. While actual algorithm design is also far
from trivial, the basic principles are easy to intuit. It comes more naturally
to intuitively describe cognitive capacities as a step-by-step process, rather
than the abstract problem (function) that is being solved.


{% question %}
There may be other reasons to move to the algorithmic level beyond the two
above.
{% question %}
Can you think other reasons to move to the algorithmic level?
{% endquestion %}
{% question %}
For each reason you came up with, answer the following: Does this reason guard
against inconsistency between algorithmic and computational level?
{% endquestion %}
{% endquestion %}

Algorithms afford a different mode of thought for the cognitive scientist: A
step-by-step procedure that specifies how the cognitive system is doing what it
does. It comes more naturally than


- scientists affinity with algorithms
- move to algorithms to solve problems at the computational level

It is also a natural mode of thinking, a

However, in the cognitive science literature
you will often find algorithmic-level theoretical claims in an attempt to
supplement the computational

### References

Blokpoel, M. (2018). [Sculpting computational-level models.](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tops.12282/full) *Topics in Cognitive Science, 10*(3), 641-648.
